---
source: dfs_handout (1).pdf
type: pdf
original_path: 国际经济学课上知识/dfs_handout (1).pdf
---

Ricardian Trade Models
Part I: Dornbusch, Fischer, Samuelson (1977)
ECON 871
1 / 27

Gameplan
Most trade papers you read nowadays will have theoretical
foundations in either:
▶Melitz (2003), which you covered with Kim.
▶Models with heterogeneous ﬁrms and imperfect competition.
▶Trade is generated by increasing returns to scale in production.
▶Eaton and Kortum (2002)
▶Ricardian model.
▶Perfect competition.
▶Trade is generated by differences in technology (productivity)
across countries.
We’re going to build up to EK, starting with Dornbusch, Fischer
and Samuelson (1977).
2 / 27

A Little History of Thought
In 1817, David Ricardo provided a mathematical example showing
that countries could gain from trade by exploiting differences in
their ability to produce different goods.
▶Two countries do better by specializing in goods and trading,
even when one country has absolute advantage.
▶Usually taught to undergrads as a way to demonstrate the
gains from trade, but then “put back in the attic.”1
▶Problem: The Ricardian model is not tractable to solve with
many goods and/or many countries.
▶As a result, theoretical/quantitative literature moved toward
other driving forces of trade:
▶Differences in factor endowments (Heckscher-Ohlin)
▶Increasing returns (Krugman, Melitz)
1Eaton and Kortum, 2012
3 / 27

Ricardian Revival
A couple of theoretical innovations brought about a revival of the
Ricardian model.
▶(TODAY) Dornbusch, Fischer, Samuelson (DFS) (1977)—two
countries, many goods.
▶Key Innovation: Model a continuum of goods.
▶Also introduce trade costs.
▶Limitation: Still only two countries.
▶(WEDNESDAY) Eaton and Kortum (EK) (2002)—many
countries, many goods.
▶Key Innovation: Model productivity in different countries as
realizations of random variables.
4 / 27

Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods
DFS is based on the Ricardian model.
▶Learn this in ECON 1 or undergrad trade.
▶Trade and specialization patterns are determined by countries
having different technologies or productivities.
Key Features:
▶Absolute Advantage: Countries have productivity in
producing certain goods.
▶Comparative Advantage: Lower opportunity cost of
producing some goods.
▶Comparative rather than absolute advantage determines
trade patterns.
Main Drawback: the Ricardian model is not tractable to solve with
a large number of goods and/or countries.
5 / 27

DFS: Environment and Endowments2
The breakthrough of DFS was to model a continuum of sectors,
which makes the characterization of the equilibrium fairly simple.
▶Two countries: Home (H) and Foreign (F).
▶Continuum of homogeneous goods, z ∈[0, 1].
▶Labor is the only factor of production:
▶Country i ∈[H, F] is populated by Li workers.
▶Each worker is paid a wage, wi.
▶Perfect competition + constant returns to scale.
▶Costless trade (for now).
2A portion of these notes are based on lecture slides from Elhanan Helpman.
6 / 27

DFS: Demand
There is a representative consumer in each country j ∈[H, F] that
has Cobb-Douglas preferences over goods:
Uj(q) =
Z 1
0
b(z) ln q(z)dz
▶z indexes the good.
▶b(z) is the share of expenditure on good z.
▶Assume that
R 1
0 b(z)dz = 1.
7 / 27

DFS: Demand
Utility maximization with Cobb-Douglas preferences implies:
pH(z)qH(z) = b(z)YH
pF(z)qF(z) = b(z)YF
▶Where pi(z)qi(z) is expenditure on good z in country i.
▶Yi = wiLi is total income in country i.
8 / 27

DFS: Supply
Technology: Assume that each good z has a unit labor
requirement ai(z) in country i.
▶For a continuum of goods, we can deﬁne a function:
A(z) ≡aF(z)
aH(z), A′(z) < 0
▶This z, increases, H’s comparative advantage decreases.
▶Or, H has a comparative advantage in low-z goods, while F
has a comparative advantage in high-z goods.
9 / 27

DFS: Supply
The cost of producing good z is given by:
wH × aH(z) in country H, and
wF × aF(z) in country F
Simple Production Rule: Good z will be produced in H if:
wH × aH(z) ≤wF × aF(z) ⇐⇒A(z) > wF
wH
And, similarly, good z will be produced in F if:
aH(z)wH > aF(z)wF ⇐⇒A(z) < wF
wH
10 / 27

DFS: Equilibrium
Two objects will characterize the equilibrium:
1. Relative wages:
ω = wH
wF
2. Cut-off good, ¯z, such that:
▶H produces every good z ≤¯z.
▶F produces every good z ≥¯z.
11 / 27

DFS: Equilibrium
Two unknowns, so we need two equations.
1. From the production rule, we know that
A(¯z) = wH
wF
= ω
2. For the second condition, impose balanced trade, and let
G(¯z =
R ¯z
0 b(z)dz be the share of income spent on goods
produced in H.
Balanced trade implies:
G(¯z)wFLF
|
{z
}
Home exports
= [1 −G(¯z)] wHLH
|
{z
}
Home imports
Rearranging, this is:
ω =
G(¯z)
1 −G(¯z)
LF
LH
≡B(¯z)
12 / 27

DFS
So, now we have a system of two equations (A(¯z) and B(¯z)) in two
unknowns—¯z and ω.
ω = A(¯z)
(1)
ω =
G(¯z)
1 −G(¯z)
LF
LH
= B(¯z)
(2)
Notes:
▶The A(z) curve is monotonically decreasing in z (by design).
▶On the other hand, G′(¯z) > 0, so B(z) is monotonically
increasing in z.
▶Also note that B(0) = 0 and limz→1 B(z) = +∞.
▶Hence, we have a unique equilibrium.
13 / 27

DFS: Equilibrium
14 / 27

Comparative Statics: Population Growth
▶Suppose that the population in F increases. From the
point of view of H, you can interpret this as trade integration
with a large country.
▶LF ↑=⇒B(¯z) will shift upward. (Recall: ω =
G(¯z)
1−G(¯z)
LF
LH )
15 / 27

Comparative Statics: Population Growth
So, if LF
LH increases:
▶Home’s welfare improves.
▶A fall in the set of goods produced (¯z ↓).
▶Real income in terms of goods produced in H is constant.
▶Real income will increase in terms of imported goods.
▶Foreign’s welfare worsens.
▶Increase in the set of goods produced.
▶Real income is constant in terms of goods produced in F.
▶Real income declines in terms of goods produced in H.
16 / 27

Comparative Statics: Population Growth
To see this in more detail, let’s normalize wH = 1. Consider prices
faced by consumers in H:
▶Then, Y ′
H = YH = LH, by choice of numeraire.
▶If good z’s production remains in H:
pH(z) = aH(z)wH = pH(z)′
▶If good z’s production remains in F:
w′
F < wF =⇒pH(z)′ = w′
FaF(z) < pH(z)
▶If good z’s production moves to F:
w′
FaF(z) ≤aH(z) =⇒pH(z)′ < pH(z)
17 / 27

Welfare Changes: Intuition
▶At the initial equilibrium, the increase in the foreign relative
labor force creates an excess supply of labor abroad, and
an excess demand for labor at home.
▶This corresponds to a trade surplus in the home country.
Recall, under balanced trade:
w∗L∗G(ˆi)
|
{z
}
Exports from H to F
= wL
h
1 −G(ˆi
i
|
{z
}
Exports from F to H
▶The increase in home country real wages eliminates the
surplus, but also raises relative unit labor costs at home.
▶The increase in relative unit labor costs in H,
w
w∗↑, implies a
loss of comparative advantage in marginal industries, and
thus a needed reduction in the range of commodities
produced.
18 / 27

DFS and the Gravity Equation
The DFS model predicts a simpliﬁed version (with no trade
frictions) of the gravity equation.
▶Gravity equations in trade are a model of bilateral trade
ﬂows in which size and distance effects enter
multiplicatively—like the law of gravity in physics.
Newton’s Law:
Fij = MiMj
D2
ij
Gravity in Trade:
Vod = YoYd
Dod
▶Workhorse for analyzing determinants of bilateral trade ﬂows
for 50+ years.
▶We’ll come back to this.
19 / 27

DFS and the Gravity Equation
Back to DFS, the trade volume can be written as:
2w∗L∗G(ˆi) = 2(wL) × (w∗L∗)
w∗L∗+ wL
= 2Y × Y ∗
Y W
where Y and Y ∗are home and foreign GDP and Y W = Y + Y ∗.
▶This is a simpliﬁed version of the gravity equation, where
trade ﬂows depend on country size.
▶It can be shown that any model with complete specialization,
homothetic preferences, and no trade barriers delivers this
prediction.
20 / 27

Transport Costs and Non-Traded Goods
DFS also analyze economies with iceberg transport costs.
▶Iceberg Cost: To get 1 unit of good z from H to F, have to
ship τ > 1 units.
▶H produce commodities for which domestic labor costs falls
short of foreign labor costs adjusted for the iceberg cost:
τwHaH(z) ≤wFaF(z)
▶Similarly, country F will produce commodities for which:
wHaH(z) ≥τwFaF(z)
21 / 27

Transport Costs and Non-Traded Goods
We can deﬁne two cut-off goods, z and ¯z:
▶Deﬁne z such that τwHaH(¯z) = wfaf(¯z).
Home will produce and export z ∈[0, z]
▶Deﬁne ¯z such that wHaH(¯z) = τwFaF(¯z)
Foreign will produce and export z ∈[¯z, 1]
Graphically, now there is a gap between the two A(z) schedules:
▶The home country produces and exports commodities to the
left of the A(z)
τ
schedule.
▶Both countries produce commodities in the intermediate
range—these are non-tradables.
▶F produces and exports commodities to the right of τA(z).
22 / 27

Transport Costs and Non-Traded Goods
23 / 27

Many-Country Case
One approach to generalize DFS to many countries can be found
in Costinot (2009).
▶Trick: Put structure on the variation of the unit-labor
requirements across countries and products so that it looks
like the two-country world.
▶Assume N countries and G goods.
▶Suppose that:
▶Countries (i = 1, ..., N) have characteristics γi.
▶Goods (g = 1, ..., G) have characteristics σg.
▶Let a(σ, γ) denote the unit labor requirement in a sector σ and
country γ.
24 / 27

Many-Country Case
Deﬁnition: a(σ, γ) is strictly log-submodular if for any σ > σ′
and γ > γ′, we can write:
a(σ, γ)a(σ′, γ′) < a(σ, γ′)a(σ′, γ)
▶If we assume that a is strictly positive, we can arrange this as:
a(σ, γ)
a(σ′, γ) < a(σ, γ′)
a(σ′, γ′)
▶Intuitively, tihs means that high-γ countries have a
comparative advantage in high-σ sectors.
▶This allows us to index countries by j such that aj+1(i)
aj(i) is a
strictly decreasing function of i.
▶If we assume there is positive demand for all products, it
follows that each country will produce an internval of products
with the interval of country j below that of j + 1 etc.
25 / 27

Next Lecture: Eaton and Kortum (2002)
Eaton and Kortum (2002) extend DFS to a multi-good,
multi-country model.
▶Parametric assumption on the distribution of ai(z)’s.
▶Closed-form gravity equation.
▶Model well suited for quantitative work.
26 / 27

References I
Costinot, Arnaud, “An elementary theory of comparative
advantage,” Econometrica, 2009, 77 (4), 1165–1192.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fischer, and Paul Anthony
Samuelson, “Comparative advantage, trade, and payments in a
Ricardian model with a continuum of goods,” The American
Economic Review, 1977, 67 (5), 823–839.
Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “Technology, geography,
and trade,” Econometrica, 2002, 70 (5), 1741–1779.
Melitz, Marc J, “The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations
and aggregate industry productivity,” econometrica, 2003, 71 (6),
1695–1725.
27 / 27
